README.md, before:

#rtce
Real Time Collaborative Protocol

This is a class project, and the primary goal is to design and implement a networking protocol.  We also must implement an application to make use of the protocol, however this is secondary.  Our protocol is to allow collaborative document editing.

This program is in Java 8, so to run you need java 1.8 or higher.

## 1. Use

The jar files are located in the main rtce folder.  For the current implementation, they must remain in that folder.
They can be run from that folder on any command prompt.

Because we used java, the executables should be platform independent.  However, for convenience we list the platforms on which they have been tested below:

64-bit Windows 10

### 1.a. Server

Run the jar file RTCEServer.jar (the command is java -jar RTCEServer.jar).  At this point, the only maintenance to be done on the server side is restarting, which should only be done in the event of something breaking.

### 1.b. Client 

Run the jar file RTCEClient.jar (the command is java -jar RTCEClient.jar).

On starting the client, it will attempt to automatically discover a server.  If it fails, it will ask for the IP or hostname of the server.

For all commands listed below, replace values in {} (such as {username}) with appropriate values.

Do not abort the client except through LOGOFF.  In the current state, the server is not prepared to recover from poor termination, and so that user will not be able to reconnect until the server is restarted.  This is a weakness of the application, not the protocol.

####Server Discovery

The server discovery is implemented by having the server create a separate thread to respond with a 
"HI" to any client who sends a message.    When a client starts he will make a call to Java's routine
to get the client's IP address, and then attempt to change the fourth octet of the IP address and see
if any server responds back with a "HI".   So for example if the client's IP address is 192.168.1.9, it will
try 192.168.1.* where * is 1 - 255 to see if any server says "HI".    This limits discovery to the network, and will not discover server's that exist beyond the network (through routing tables and gateways for example)  

####login

To begin a client session, type the command login,{username},{password},{documentOwner},{documentTitle} and press enter.
For the current implementation, {documentOwner} should always match {username}, and {documentTitle} does not matter, since the current application only has a single example document hard-coded.  However, there are existing files example1 and example2 (another title will create a new file).

The valid combinations of username and password are:

- cs544,cs544
- group4,password

Thus, valid logins which will not create a new file include:

- login,cs544,cs544,cs544,example1
- login,group4,password,group4,example1
- login,cs544,cs544,cs544,example2
- login,group4,password,group4,example2

####request

To request to edit or create a section of the document, type request,{sectionNumber}.  Thus, request,1 will request to edit section 1, while request,5 will request to edit section 5, and so on.  Section 0 is a placeholder for the beginning of the document and should not be edited.  However, you can create a new section by choosing an unused number, and can place it anywhere in the document.

Once a request has been made, the token is reserved for 45 seconds.

####commit

To push changes to the document, type commit,{prevSection},{curSection}.  This can only be done after a request while the token is still reserved, and {curSection} must match {sectionNumber}.  {prevSection} is the number of the section before the edited section, and is used if a new section is being created.  So, commit,1,2 will allow you to edit section 2 if you previously issued request,2.  If you previously issued request,7 and no section seven exists, commit,6,7 will let you add section 7 to the end of the document, commit,0,7 will allow you to add section 7 to the beginning of the document, or commit,3,7 will allow you to add section 7 immediately following section 3 (so, between section 3 and 4, assuming no other section has been added between them).
Following the issue of the commit request, you will be prompted to enter the new text.  This text will replace the currently existing text.  If you want to make a small edit (eg. in section 2 change "some one" to "someone") it is recommended to copy the old line, paste it in the prompt, and then make the edit to the pasted line before pressing enter.

####block

If you are the owner of a document, you can block another user for a period of time.  To do so, type block,{username}.  In the current application, this is fairly limited.  The owner of the document is the first user to log in.  You can only block someone who has already logged in.  The block lasts for time indicated by the servConfig.conf file (default 5 minutes).  So, if you first log in as cs544 and then someone else logs in as group4, you can issue block,group4 and then that person will be unable to edit the document for 2 minutes.

The block time is 2 minutes.

####LOGOFF

Ends the session, gracefully. Just type LOGOFF

## 2. Robustness Analysis

We did attempt to ensure the server and client could handle different invalid actions.   Our client
does filter out several invalid actions, however we loosened these restrictions temporarily to simulate
hostile or simply incorrect clients who may attempt to either traverse the DFA improperly to supply fields
improperly.   For example we attempted:
- Requesting a second token while already holding a token
- Attempting a commit with an invalid token
- Attempting several commands prior to login
- Attempt to login after already having logged in
- Attempt to request a token when another client already has a token
- several others

As such we are confident in our server/client handling messages and ensuring they follow the DFA and when
not following the DFA they respond accordingly.   

For this implementation we have a fixed maximum number of sections and length of section.  Exceeding these will cause an error due to implementation.

What we did not attempt is sending random values for fields or sending out of range data, such that the
message itself may be a valid DFA transition, but the data inside the message may cause an out of bounds
check or other exception.   

Additionally we did not perform any testing where a client may perform a hostile attempt to discover and
use another client's session id to pose as another user.   We believe if/when encryption is applied on
top of the protocol this would deter attempts to have another entity gain access to a user's session ID 

Do not abort the client except through LOGOFF.  In the current state, the server is not prepared to recover from poor termination, and so that user will not be able to reconnect until the server is restarted.  This is a weakness of the application, not the protocol.

## 3. Non-implemented Features

### 3.a. Encryption

While the system to support encryption exists, currently we do not support any encryption.  However, it would not be too difficult to hook encryption in to the protocol.

### 3.b. Other options

While the system to support "generic options" exists, currently we do not support any of them.  However, it would not be too difficult to hook basic options in to the protocol.

### 3.c. Actual document loading

While the beginnings of the system to load and work with real documents on the disk exists, it would take more time on the application side of implementation to complete that.  However, all protocol level aspects are implemented.  Due to the focus on the protocol, we only allow users to work on a single, hard-coded document.

## 4. Extra Credit

See section Server Discovery under Client in Use.

## 5. Credits

This is the final project for Group 4 in CS544.


Our team members are:

Edwin Dauber

Ankush Israney

Anthony Emma

Francis Obiagwu

Commit message:

Added small section about compilation to README

README.md, after:

#rtce
Real Time Collaborative Protocol

This is a class project, and the primary goal is to design and implement a networking protocol.  We also must implement an application to make use of the protocol, however this is secondary.  Our protocol is to allow collaborative document editing.

This program is in Java 8, so to run you need java 1.8 or higher.

## 1. Use

The jar files are located in the main rtce folder.  For the current implementation, they must remain in that folder.
They can be run from that folder on any command prompt.

If for some reason it is necessary to re-compile, use the standard Java compilation procedure, either from the command line or your favorite IDE.

Because we used Java, the executables should be platform independent.  However, for convenience we list the platforms on which they have been tested below:

64-bit Windows 10

### 1.a. Server

Run the jar file RTCEServer.jar (the command is java -jar RTCEServer.jar).  At this point, the only maintenance to be done on the server side is restarting, which should only be done in the event of something breaking.

### 1.b. Client 

Run the jar file RTCEClient.jar (the command is java -jar RTCEClient.jar).

On starting the client, it will attempt to automatically discover a server.  If it fails, it will ask for the IP or hostname of the server.

For all commands listed below, replace values in {} (such as {username}) with appropriate values.

Do not abort the client except through LOGOFF.  In the current state, the server is not prepared to recover from poor termination, and so that user will not be able to reconnect until the server is restarted.  This is a weakness of the application, not the protocol.

####Server Discovery

The server discovery is implemented by having the server create a separate thread to respond with a 
"HI" to any client who sends a message.    When a client starts he will make a call to Java's routine
to get the client's IP address, and then attempt to change the fourth octet of the IP address and see
if any server responds back with a "HI".   So for example if the client's IP address is 192.168.1.9, it will
try 192.168.1.* where * is 1 - 255 to see if any server says "HI".    This limits discovery to the network, and will not discover server's that exist beyond the network (through routing tables and gateways for example)  

####login

To begin a client session, type the command login,{username},{password},{documentOwner},{documentTitle} and press enter.
For the current implementation, {documentOwner} should always match {username}, and {documentTitle} does not matter, since the current application only has a single example document hard-coded.  However, there are existing files example1 and example2 (another title will create a new file).

The valid combinations of username and password are:

- cs544,cs544
- group4,password

Thus, valid logins which will not create a new file include:

- login,cs544,cs544,cs544,example1
- login,group4,password,group4,example1
- login,cs544,cs544,cs544,example2
- login,group4,password,group4,example2

####request

To request to edit or create a section of the document, type request,{sectionNumber}.  Thus, request,1 will request to edit section 1, while request,5 will request to edit section 5, and so on.  Section 0 is a placeholder for the beginning of the document and should not be edited.  However, you can create a new section by choosing an unused number, and can place it anywhere in the document.

Once a request has been made, the token is reserved for 45 seconds.

####commit

To push changes to the document, type commit,{prevSection},{curSection}.  This can only be done after a request while the token is still reserved, and {curSection} must match {sectionNumber}.  {prevSection} is the number of the section before the edited section, and is used if a new section is being created.  So, commit,1,2 will allow you to edit section 2 if you previously issued request,2.  If you previously issued request,7 and no section seven exists, commit,6,7 will let you add section 7 to the end of the document, commit,0,7 will allow you to add section 7 to the beginning of the document, or commit,3,7 will allow you to add section 7 immediately following section 3 (so, between section 3 and 4, assuming no other section has been added between them).
Following the issue of the commit request, you will be prompted to enter the new text.  This text will replace the currently existing text.  If you want to make a small edit (eg. in section 2 change "some one" to "someone") it is recommended to copy the old line, paste it in the prompt, and then make the edit to the pasted line before pressing enter.

####block

If you are the owner of a document, you can block another user for a period of time.  To do so, type block,{username}.  In the current application, this is fairly limited.  The owner of the document is the first user to log in.  You can only block someone who has already logged in.  The block lasts for time indicated by the servConfig.conf file (default 5 minutes).  So, if you first log in as cs544 and then someone else logs in as group4, you can issue block,group4 and then that person will be unable to edit the document for 2 minutes.

The block time is 2 minutes.

####LOGOFF

Ends the session, gracefully. Just type LOGOFF

## 2. Robustness Analysis

We did attempt to ensure the server and client could handle different invalid actions.   Our client
does filter out several invalid actions, however we loosened these restrictions temporarily to simulate
hostile or simply incorrect clients who may attempt to either traverse the DFA improperly to supply fields
improperly.   For example we attempted:
- Requesting a second token while already holding a token
- Attempting a commit with an invalid token
- Attempting several commands prior to login
- Attempt to login after already having logged in
- Attempt to request a token when another client already has a token
- several others

As such we are confident in our server/client handling messages and ensuring they follow the DFA and when
not following the DFA they respond accordingly.   

For this implementation we have a fixed maximum number of sections and length of section.  Exceeding these will cause an error due to implementation.

What we did not attempt is sending random values for fields or sending out of range data, such that the
message itself may be a valid DFA transition, but the data inside the message may cause an out of bounds
check or other exception.   

Additionally we did not perform any testing where a client may perform a hostile attempt to discover and
use another client's session id to pose as another user.   We believe if/when encryption is applied on
top of the protocol this would deter attempts to have another entity gain access to a user's session ID 

Do not abort the client except through LOGOFF.  In the current state, the server is not prepared to recover from poor termination, and so that user will not be able to reconnect until the server is restarted.  This is a weakness of the application, not the protocol.

## 3. Non-implemented Features

### 3.a. Encryption

While the system to support encryption exists, currently we do not support any encryption.  However, it would not be too difficult to hook encryption in to the protocol.

### 3.b. Other options

While the system to support "generic options" exists, currently we do not support any of them.  However, it would not be too difficult to hook basic options in to the protocol.

### 3.c. Actual document loading

While the beginnings of the system to load and work with real documents on the disk exists, it would take more time on the application side of implementation to complete that.  However, all protocol level aspects are implemented.  Due to the focus on the protocol, we only allow users to work on a single, hard-coded document.

## 4. Extra Credit

See section Server Discovery under Client in Use.

## 5. Credits

This is the final project for Group 4 in CS544.


Our team members are:

Edwin Dauber

Ankush Israney

Anthony Emma

Francis Obiagwu
